Documentation for hud_generate_json management command (#4728)
cfpb/cfgov-refresh: docs/housing-counselor-data.md

# Housing Counselor Data Processing

> The [Find a Housing Counselor tool](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/find-a-housing-counselor/) gets its data from the US Department of Housing and Urban Development. HUD provides an API to their list of approved counseling agencies.

Reviewer: Could we add a link to [the HUD API](https://data.hud.gov/housing_counseling.html) here?

> We generate the JSON data for the Find a Housing Counselor tool using the `hud_generate_json` management command. This page describes how that command works to transform HUD data to the JSON file format we use for the FAHC tool, including the following steps:

Reviewer: How would you feel about adding links throughout this document to the Python source files being referenced, e.g. [`hud_generate_json`](https://github.com/cfpb/cfgov-refresh/blob/master/cfgov/housing_counselor/management/commands/hud_generate_json.py)? This would make it easier for developers to follow along in the code when reading this document.

  1. fetch agency listings from HUD
  2. clean the results
  3. fill in any missing latitude and longitude values

>   4. create files of the 10 nearest results for each US ZIP code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  4. create files of the 10 nearest results for each U.S. ZIP code
```

## Fetch agency listings

(_in `fetcher.py`_)

Request every housing counselor in HUD's database with this request:

```
https://data.hud.gov/Housing_Counselor/searchByLocation?Lat=38.8951&Long=-77.0367&Distance=5000

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe pull this out of a separate code fence and up with the sentence leading into it, like:

> Fetch a list of every housing counselor in HUD's database with a request to `https://data.hud.gov/Housing_Counselor/searchByLocation?Lat=38.8951&Long=-77.0367&Distance=5000`.

It returns thousands of results like this:

```json

>     {

Reviewer 2: Without the context of the start of the file, the indentation in this example is unnecessary and could be removed.

        "services": "DFC,FBC,PPC,RHC",
        "languages": "ENG,SPA",
        "agc_STATUS": "A",
        "agc_SRC_CD": "HUD",
        "counslg_METHOD": "Face to Face Counseling,Group Counseling,Internet Counseling,Phone Counseling",
        "agcid": "80790",

>         "adr1": "24331 W. Eight Mile Road",

Reviewer: It occurs to me that it might be a good idea to modify this data (both here and below) into a made-up counselor instead of including specific details of a real one. That way in future if this real one changes its data or is closed, we won't have out-of-date data in our docs. We also wouldn't want to be seen as specifically endorsing or highlighting one counselor.

        "adr2": " ",
        "city": "DETROIT",
        "email": "tmorris@abayomicdc.org",
        "fax": "313-541-3820",
        "nme": "ABAYOMI COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION",
        "phone1": "313-541-9828-222",
        "statecd": "MI",
        "weburl": "www.abayomicdc.org",
        "zipcd": "48219-1028",
        "agc_ADDR_LATITUDE": "42.442658",
        "agc_ADDR_LONGITUDE": "-83.28329",
        "parentid": "81228",
        "county_NME": "",
        "phone2": " ",
        "mailingadr1": "24331 W. Eight Mile Road",
        "mailingadr2": " ",
        "mailingcity": "DETROIT",
        "mailingzipcd": "48219-1028",
        "mailingstatecd": "MI",
        "state_NME": "Michigan",
        "state_FIPS_CODE": null,
        "faithbased": "Y",
        "colonias_IND": "Y",
        "migrantwkrs_IND": "N"
    },
```

## Clean the results

(_in `fetcher.py`_)

> We replace the 'languages' value with the full language names. We replace the 'services' value with fully spelled out service descriptions. Both of these mappings come from the HUD API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We replace the `languages` values with the full language names. We replace the `services` values with fully spelled out service descriptions. Both of these mappings come from the HUD API.
```

(_in `cleaner.py`_)

> Clean the data: Convert latitude and longitude values to Floats. Convert the the city and organization name to title case. Ensure email appears to be an email (otherwise leave it blank). Add `http://` to the URL if it is present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clean the data: Convert latitude and longitude values to floats. Convert the the city and organization name to title case. Ensure email appears to be an email (otherwise leave it blank). Add `http://` to the URL if it is not already present.
```

## Backfill missing latitude and longitude values

(_in `geocoder.py`_)

If any counselor records are missing their latitude or longitude data, we fill in those values with the lat/long location of the agency's ZIP code. This uses a saved data file with mappings from each ZIP code to its latitude and longitude values. We create the file of mappings ahead of time, using the `hud_geocode_zipcodes` management command.

## Create collections of results by ZIP code

(_in `generator.py`_)

> Create a local sqlite database and define a `distance_in_miles` function in it. Fill the database with a three-column table: For each counselor in the list, include its latitude and longitude (both in radians) and all of its information from the HUD API as a JSON text string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a local SQLite database and define a `distance_in_miles` function in it. Fill the database with a three-column table: For each counselor in the list, include its latitude and longitude (both in radians) and all of its information from the HUD API as a JSON text string.
```

> Create a local sqlite database and define a `distance_in_miles` function in it. Fill the database with a three-column table: For each counselor in the list, include its latitude and longitude (both in radians) and all of its information from the HUD API as a JSON text string.

Reviewer: Instead of local, perhaps we should say ["in-memory"](https://github.com/cfpb/cfgov-refresh/blob/master/cfgov/housing_counselor/generator.py#L38) here so as not to imply that a file gets left behind in the workspace when this is run.

> For each ZIP code in the US, query the database to find the 10 closest housing counselors to the lat/long of that ZIP. Put the information in a JSON structure like this (but with ten results instead of two):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 For each ZIP code in the U.S., query the database to find the 10 closest housing counselors to the lat/long of that ZIP. Put the information in a JSON structure like this (but with ten results instead of two):
```

        "languages": ["English"],
        "faithbased": "N",
        "mailingstatecd": "NY",
        "email": null,
        "fax": " ",
        "phone1": "518-434-1730",
        "distance": 17.173661586258415,
        "phone2": " ",
        "agc_ADDR_LATITUDE": 42.658026,
        "agcid": "81405",
        "agc_SRC_CD": "HUD",
        "nme": "Affordable Housing Partnership",
        "migrantwkrs_IND": "N",
        "parentid": "82772",
        "services": ["Mortgage Delinquency and Default Resolution Counse", "Financial Management/Budget Counseling", "Financial, Budgeting and Credit Repair Workshops", "Home Improvement and Rehabilitation Counseling", "Pre-purchase Counseling", "Pre-purchase Homebuyer Education Workshops", "Rental Housing Counseling", "Rental Housing Workshops"],
        "counslg_METHOD": "Face to Face Counseling,Phone Counseling",
        "county_NME": "",
        "mailingadr1": "255 Orange St",
        "statecd": "NY",
        "mailingadr2": " ",
        "mailingzipcd": "12210-2404",
        "state_NME": "New York",
        "agc_ADDR_LONGITUDE": -73.75812,
        "colonias_IND": "N"
    }]
}
```

Save the resulting JSON into a file on the workspace.

> After the management command is finished, we then upload the generated JSON files to Amazon s3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the management command is finished, we then upload the generated JSON files to Amazon S3.
```
